[SPIR-V] Add proposal for I/O builtin in Clang (#97)
llvm/wg-hlsl: proposals/NNNN-spirv-input-builtin.md

# SPIR-V Input/Output built-ins

 * Proposal: [NNNN](NNNN-spirv-input-builtin.md)
 * Author(s): [Nathan Gauër](https://github.com/Keenuts)
 * Status: **Design In Progress**

## Introduction

HLSL has semantic input/outputs parameters used to carry information
to and from a shader, e.g: the system semantic `SV_GroupID` or `MY_SEMANTIC`,
a user-defined semantic.

In SPIR-V, those are translated to `Input` and `Output` variables,
with either a `BuiltIn` or `Location` decoration.

Input `BuiltIn` values are private to the executing lane. Reading their
value has no side-effect. If not used, those built-in can safely be removed

> from the shader module (Unlike the inputs tagged with `Location`).

Reviewer: In SPIR-V you can remove the user defined inputs (those with the Location decoration). Vulkan requires that the inputs are a subset of the output of the previous stage. They do not have to match exactly. You cannot remove outputs that are not written to. That will give a validation error. Here is an example where SPIR-V opt removes an unused input: https://godbolt.org/z/Mdo3WWssb.

Author: Right, only outputs are an issue. Removed this line, and also rephrased the one above to just say "we don't talk about Location"

Output 'BuiltIn' values are slightly different:
 - Their initial value is undefined. Loading them is UB.
 - Storing to it has a side effect: removing the pipeline default value.
 - Loading the built-in once stored to is defined: it returns the last
   set value.

Examples:
```hlsl
  float a = my_output_builtin * 123.f; // Undefined behavior.
  my_output_builtin = my_output_builtin; // Undefined behavior.
  my_output_builtin = 0.f; // Replacing pipeline's default value with 0.f.
  float b = my_output_builtin; // Defined, b = 0.f;
```

In HLSL, Input/Output built-ins can be accessed through two methods:

```hlsl
[[vk::ext_builtin_input(/* NumWorkGroups */ 24)]]
static const uint3 from_a_global;

void main(uint3 from_a_semantic : SV_ThreadId)
{
  uint3 a = from_a_semantic + from_a_global;
}
```

This document explain how we plan on implementing those in Clang/LLVM.

## Proposed Solution

## Frontend changes

> Global variables marked with Inline SPIR-V will be marked using two new

Reviewer: instead of saying "Inline SPIR-V" you should mention the specific attributes.

attributes:
- `HLSLInputBuiltin`
- `HLSLOutputBuiltin`

In addition, a two new address spaces will be added:
- `hlsl_input`
- `hlsl_output`

The TD file will attach each attribute to a `SubjectList` with the following
constraints:

```
HLSLInputBuiltin:  S->hasGlobalStorage() &&
                   S->getStorageClass()==StorageClass::SC_Static &&
                   S->getType().isConstQualified()

HLSLOutputBuiltin: S->hasGlobalStorage() &&
                   S->getStorageClass()==StorageClass::SC_Static &&
                   !S->getType().isConstQualified()

def HLSLVkExtBuiltinInput: InheritableAttr {
  let Spellings = [CXX11<"vk", "ext_builtin_input">];
  let Args = [IntArgument<"BuiltIn">];
  let Subjects = SubjectList<[HLSLInputBuiltin], ErrorDiag>;
  let LangOpts = [HLSL];
}

def HLSLVkExtBuiltinOutput: InheritableAttr {
  let Spellings = [CXX11<"vk", "ext_builtin_output">];
  let Args = [IntArgument<"BuiltIn">];
  let Subjects = SubjectList<[HLSLOutputBuiltin], ErrorDiag>;
  let LangOpts = [HLSL];
}
```

When this attribute is encountered, several changes will occur:
- AS will be set to `hlsl_input` for input built-ins.

> - AS will be set to `hlsl_output` for input built-ins.

Reviewer: Spell out address space. It took me a few second to figure out what it meant.

> - AS will be set to `hlsl_input` for input built-ins.
> - AS will be set to `hlsl_output` for input built-ins.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- AS will be set to `hlsl_input` for input built-ins.
- AS will be set to `hlsl_output` for output built-ins.
```

- a `spirv.Decoration` metadata is added with the `BuiltIn <id>` decoration.

The AS change will allow the back-end to correctly determine the variable
storage class.

> The metadata will be converted `OpDecorate <reg> BuiltIn <id>`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The metadata will be converted to `OpDecorate <reg> BuiltIn <id>`.
```

The same mechanism will be used for semantic inputs, but we'll also create
load/stores in the entry-point wrapper to be equivalent to:

```
[[vk::ext_builtin_input(/* GlobalInvocationId */ 28)]]
static const uint3 dispatch_thread_id;

[[vk::ext_builtin_output(/* ValidOutputSemantic */ 1234)]]
static uint3 output_semantic;

[numthreads(1, 1, 1)]
uint3 csmain(uint3 id : SV_DispatchThreadID) : SV_SomeValidOutputSemantic {
  [...]
}

void generated_entrypoint() {
  output_semantic = main(dispatch_thread_id);
}
```

> In have the user's entrypoint returns a struct with semantic on fields,
> the entrypoint will have 1 store per semantic, and the module 1 global per
> semantic.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the entrypoint returns a struct with semantic on fields,
the entrypoint will have 1 store per semantic, and the module 1 global per
semantic.
```

## Backend changes

Backend will translate the new `vulkan_input` address space to

> `StorageClass::Input`, and `vulkan_output` to `StorageClass::Output`.

Reviewer: Do you mean `hlsl_input` instead of `vulkan_input`?

Reviewer: You should also mention which backend.

```suggestion
The SPIR-V backend will translate the new `hlsl_input` address space to
`StorageClass::Input`, and `hlsl_output` to `StorageClass::Output`.
```

> Decoration lowering is already available.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The SPIR-V backend already accepts the `spirv.Decoration` metadata.
```

 * Status: **Design In Progress**

## Introduction

HLSL has semantic input/outputs parameters used to carry information
to and from a shader, e.g: the system semantic `SV_GroupID` or `MY_SEMANTIC`,
a user-defined semantic.

In SPIR-V, those are translated to `Input` and `Output` variables,
with either a `BuiltIn` or `Location` decoration.

Example:

```hlsl
float4 vsmain(float4 Position : POSITION) : SV_POSITION
{
  return Position;
}
```

Both `POSITION` and `SV_POSITION` will be represented as an `OpVariable`:

- `POSITION` will have the `Input` storage class.
- `SV_POSITION` will have the `Output` storage class.

- `POSITION` will be decorated with `Location 0`.
- `SV_POSITION` will be decorated with `BuiltIn Position`.

In addition, users can define their own SPIR-V built-ins using inline SPIR-V:

```hlsl
[[vk::ext_builtin_input(/* NumWorkGroups */ 24)]]
static const uint3 myBuiltIn;
```

This document explain how we plan on implementing those in Clang/LLVM.

## Proposed Solution

## Frontend changes

Global variables marked with Inline SPIR-V will be marked using two new
attributes:
- `HLSLInputBuiltin`
- `HLSLOutputBuiltin`

In addition, a new address space will be added:

> - `vulkan_private`

Reviewer 2: I'd be okay calling this just `private`. Since DX is eventually going to adopt SPIR-V we might as well start getting the language ready for that and not force renaming things in the future.

  let Args = [IntArgument<"BuiltIn">];
  let Subjects = SubjectList<[HLSLInputBuiltin], ErrorDiag>;
  let LangOpts = [HLSL];
}

def HLSLVkExtBuiltinOutput: InheritableAttr {
  let Spellings = [CXX11<"vk", "ext_builtin_output">];
  let Args = [IntArgument<"BuiltIn">];
  let Subjects = SubjectList<[HLSLOutputBuiltin], ErrorDiag>;
  let LangOpts = [HLSL];
}
```

When this attribute is encountered, several changes will occur:
- The address space will be set to `vulkan_private`
- a constructor will be added.
- a destructor will be added.

The construction will call a target-specific intrinsic: `spv_load_builtin`.
This builtin takes the SPIR-V built-in ID as parameter, and returns the
value of the corresponding built-in.

The destructor will call another intrinsic: `spv_store_builtin`. This builtin
takes the SPIR-V built-in ID, as well as a value to store as parameter.

And lastly, to support input parameters with semantics, the same intrinsic
will be called in the generated entrypoint wrapper function.

Because the 2 new intrinsics will be marked as `MemWrite` or `MemRead`, LLVM
won't be able to optimize them away, and the initial/final load/store will

> be kept.

Reviewer 3: When looking at what DXC does, I see it loads/stores only under control flow, when that's the way it's used in the entry.  I think this proposal is written to imply that it will not match that behavior.  I imagine that an unused output will have an unconditional write at the end of every entry that has such a global declaration in the file.

This proposal offers no mechanism for guaranteeing accesses under control flow remain under that control flow, and no additional accesses are added to the built-ins as a side effect of some implementation detail, for either load or store.

Author: Splitting 2 issues here:
 - unused input/output not being discarded/removed
 - control flow access
 
@s-perron to double check, but AFAIK in SPIR-V, The Built-in value is ONLY visible to the executing lane. Meaning having a load/store moved outside of a given control-flow wouldn't impact the behavior of the shader.
(Specifically talking about the control flow bit, non-discarded unused built ins is another issue)

Corresponding code could be:

```
[[vk::ext_builtin_input(/* GlobalInvocationId */ 28)]]

> static const uint3 myBuiltIn;

Reviewer 3: How is the type checked for a given built-in?  Are the available built-ins predetermined?  Could they be symbolically represented instead of passing a number?  Or does the compiler just allow you to do anything you want here, and it's up to you to make it valid for the SPIR-V output?

Author: It is up to you to select the correct builtin type for the ID you pass:
 - BuiltIns can be added by extensions.
 - This means compiler doesn't know about this extension, hence would have no ability to validate it anyway.
 - spirv-val, if it knows the extension, can validate the type later on.
 
In DXC today, what happens is DXC always accept, then spirv-val complains if the builtin type is not the expected type.

What do you mean by symbolically represented?

void main(uint3 thread_id_from_param : SV_DispatchThreadID) {
  [...]
}

constructor_myBuiltIn() {
  myBuiltIn = spv_load_builtin(28);
}

destructor_myBuiltIn() {

>   spv_store_builtin(28, myBuiltIn);

Reviewer 3: Why have destructor and store for an _input_ built-in?  Similarly, why have constructor and load for an _output_ built-in?

Author: That is correct. Input could omit dtor, and output could omit ctor.

}

void entrypoint() {
  constructor_myBuiltIn();

  uint3 input_param1 = spv_load_builtin(28);
  main(input_param1)

  destructor_myBuiltIn();
}
```

The emitted global variable for inline SPIR-V will be in the global scope,
meaning it will require the `Private` storage class in SPIR-V.
Because of that, globals linked to the added attributes will require a new
address space `vulkan_private`.

## Backend changes

> Backend will translate the new `vulkan_privatge` address space to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The backend will translate the new `vulkan_private` address space to
```

- `POSITION` will be decorated with `Location 0`.
- `SV_POSITION` will be decorated with `BuiltIn Position`.

In addition, users can define their own SPIR-V built-ins using inline SPIR-V:

```hlsl
[[vk::ext_builtin_input(/* NumWorkGroups */ 24)]]
static const uint3 myBuiltIn;
```

This document explain how we plan on implementing those in Clang/LLVM.

## Proposed Solution

## Static behaving like an external & LLVM

The current HLSL syntax for inline SPIR-V requires those built-ins to be
`static [const]` variables. The rational was those variables were private to
the invocation, and thus could be written/read without any concurrency issues.
This was fine in DXC as we had our own AST->SPIR-V lowering.

In Clang/LLVM, that's different: such static variable can be optimized in many
ways:
aggressive ways.
 - A non-initialized `static const` is not allowed.
 - Any dead-store to a `static int` can be removed.
 - Meaning any pure computation parent to this store can be removed.

Solving this can be done in 3 ways:
 - Change the spec, allowing the syntax to be less "magical": use `extern`.
 - Fixup the storage class of those variables in Clang.

>  - Emit an external constructor & destructor for those preventing optimization.

Reviewer 2: Using a "constructor" for custom builtins is pretty similar to the approach we're using for handling semantics. We haven't yet worked on support for writing back to semantics, but I don't think that will be a problem.

In Clang today we generate two versions of each entry function. One that takes parameters, and one that doesn't. The version that takes no parameters is the true entry, and it initializes local allocas to the system values (builtins in SPIR-V parlance), then passes those as parameters into the secondary function which is called with always_inline.

This could be extended to emit global builtin initialization into the entry function as well.

I'd be in favor of the first solution, which correctly expresses in HLSL what
those built-in variables are, see this
[spec issue](https://github.com/microsoft/hlsl-specs/issues/350).
If we emit those as `extern [thread_local]`, everything works out of the box,

> and HLSL feels less magical.

Author: That's where the `thread_local` comes in. Yes, a simple global `extern` is assumed to be shared across threads, but if we have an `extern thread_local`, then it would carry the semantic we want in HLSL, while being also find from LLVM's point of view.

> and HLSL feels less magical.

Reviewer: > We need to distinguish between how the variable works in llvm, and how it works in HLSL.

I'm thinking about this from the perspective of the person who is writing their code in HLSL. There is no `thread_local` in HLSL. The `static` keyword is used to indicate that a global variable is thread local. So I don't think the spec should be changed.

How it is represented in LLVM is an important issue, and I don't know what is best. I'll let @llvm-beanz  comment on what is more invasive in clang: static that is initialized or used in an intrinsic in the wrapper, or changing variable to extern thread local internally. This is in some ways orthogonal to changing the spec.
